So now that we've talked
about the ForkJoinPool class,
we've talked about the
ForkJoinTask class,
we've talked about
RecursiveAction,
RecursiveTask,
it's time to start
looking at the internals
of the ForkJoinPool.
And quite frankly, I
think that's really
where all the cool stuff lurks.
That's what makes ForkJoinPool
and the fork-join framework
so cool.
So ForkJoinPool is cool.
And it's really neat
because it demonstrates
all these powerful features
that we've talked about.
And now we get a chance to
really look under the hood
and see how everything
applies in practice.
So what we're going to
talk about in this lesson
is how the fork-join framework
implements its worker threads.
Now, recall from our
earlier discussion
that non-ForkJoinTask
clients insert new tasks
into the ForkJoinPool's
shared queue.
So a client comes along.
It calls execute.
It calls submit.
It calls invoke--
whatever it needs to call.
And it gives a ForkJoinTask
to be processed by something
in the pool of worker threads.
And this, quote,
"shared queue"--
and it's kind of a
misnomer because it's not
shared in the way you
might think it's shared.
It actually is used to feed
work-stealing queues managed
by the worker threads.
Now, if you actually take a
look at the implementation
of this code, you'll
note several things.
First of all, it looks like
it was written by someone who
was using Java to write C code.
The code is very,
very low-level.
It uses lots of tricks with
and-ing and or-ing bit fields.
And it treats things
in special ways.
And it has lots of
one-letter variable names.
And it's got just about no
documentation or comments.
So it's really
pretty mysterious.
However, there is a
really nice comment--
it's a very long comment--
that occurs inside
the implementation
of the ForkJoinPool class.
It's not part of
the documentation.
It's just part of
the implementation.
But if you have the source
code, you can go read it.
And it really explains
how everything
works under the hood.
And it's really,
really fascinating.
And you can understand why this
class is used so frequently
for lots of other parallel
computing libraries
because someone--
largely, my buddy Doug Lee--
put a lot of thought
into making this work.
And so what actually
happens is you've actually
got this array of work
queues, which can be expanded.
And the pool of worker
threads have a certain part
of this array of work queues
that's kind of "their"
work cue or their deck.
And then they have interposed
with this in this array
these other places where these
external threads can come along
that are
non-ForkJoinTask clients
and insert work into
the work queues.
And what's interesting
about this is--
and when we talk about
work-stealing here shortly--
when the time is right,
and a thread needs
to look for something to
do because it has nothing
in its work queue,
it can go out and it
can steal from anybody's
queue, including
these, quote,
"shared queues" that
are used by the
non-ForkJoinTask clients
to get data into
the ForkJoinPool.
So again, I encourage you
to go look at the code.
Your mind will simply melt.
But it's pretty darn cool.
So the basic idea
is we're trying
to get work into the
pool of worker threads
in the common ForkJoinPool.
Now, each worker thread
in the ForkJoinPool
effectively runs a
loop that continuously
scans for things to do.
So I like the little
animation here
with the person on
the gerbil wheel,
just working, working, working,
scanning, scanning, scanning,
looking for something to do.
They're trying to exercise.
And the goal here is to keep
all these worker threads as busy
as possible.
Nothing makes a worker
thread in the ForkJoinPool
happier than having
something to process.
So never feel like you have
to give these worker threads
a day off.
They always want to
do nothing but run.
They just love it.
So how do they do that?
Well, it turns out
that each worker thread
in the ForkJoinPool
is associated
with this double-ended
queue or the "deck."
And just to be confusing,
even though it's implemented
as a deck, it's
called work queue
in the source code, which
is a little confusing.
I'll try to call it
the deck because it
will make more sense when we
talk about the actual behavior
of these work queues.
And each of these
work queue decks--
one associated per worker
thread in the ForkJoinPool--
will serve as the main source
of tasks for that worker thread
to process.
All right, so to think about
that, look at the picture.
Here we have a pool
of worker threads
that has three
worker threads in it.
And each of them is associated
with a work queue deck.
And as you can see,
some of the decks
have work queued up,
ready to be processed
by that thread or a
thread that steals it.
Another work queue
has nothing in it.
And just keep that in
the back of your mind
as we talk about this because
this is important to understand
how work-stealing works and
how the overall worker thread
model is designed
and implemented
in the ForkJoinPool.
As I mentioned before,
the actual deck
is implemented by this nested
class called work queue.
This is private inside
the ForkJoinPool.
You can go to the link at
the bottom of the slide
and actually download the
source code and look at it.
It's quite interesting.
Now, there's a whole bunch
of methods in work queue.
We care about three
of those methods
quite a bit in our discussion.
And those methods are
push, pop, and pull.
So keep those in the
back of your mind.
When we get to the
next lesson, where
we talk about
work-stealing, we'll
get a chance to dive a little
deeper into the semantics
of push, pop, and pull.
But for right now, let's
just focus on push and pop.
So if a task that's run in
the context of a worker thread
calls fork, then that new
task is implicitly pushed--
by fork, of course--
onto the head of the
work queue's deck.
Work queue is a deck.
The worker's deck.
Let's just say that.
So when fork is called,
that results in that task
being pushed onto the deck.
So let's assume for
sake of argument
that the thread we show
in the middle of the pool
has some code that calls fork
on a ForkJoinTask of some sort.
That will end up pushing
that task or that subtask
onto the head of the deck.
Now at some point,
this worker thread
will most likely be
ready to do some work.
So it'll go ahead and want
to process this stuff.
Maybe that's going to
happen when it calls join.
So when join is
called, what will
happen is that the thread
where the join was called
will turn around and
say, hey, is there
anything to do in my deck?
Do I have any subtasks to run?
And it does this by
trying to pop them off.
So it'll turn around
and pop of a subtask.
And then it'll go ahead
and execute that subtask.
Which, as we saw before,
in the context of something
like RecursiveAction
or RecursiveTask,
will end up calling the
compute hook method in order
to do its thing.
Now, the key thing to
note here is not so much
what the subtask
is doing when it's
computing-- that's
interesting, but not essential
to the discussion.
The interesting
part here is really
the order in which the worker
thread pushes and pops things
onto the deck.
And this worker thread
pushes and pops things
onto the deck in last in,
first out or LIFO, order.
What happens in this case is
that when you pop something
from the head of the deck,
then that worker thread
will run that task.
It'll compute its value,
compute its result,
and so on to completion.
It'll just keep running
it until it's done.
There's no different
lifecycle states the way
there is with a
regular Java thread.
This thing just starts
to run and keeps
running until it finishes.
Of course, the underlying worker
thread has its own lifecycle.
So if it runs long enough,
the operating system scheduler
may decide to suspend it,
let something else run,
and then resume it later.
But that's outside the scope
of what the ForkJoinTask is
concerned with.
As we talked about before when
we talked about the join method
in the ForkJoinTask, join will
pitch in to pop and execute
these subtasks.
And so as a result, it
will either take things out
of its deck or, as we'll see
later in the next lesson,
it will try to steal
work elsewhere.
And it'll keep pitching in and
running these subtasks until it
finally gets the
result that it wants,
so that join can return--
either return a value if it's
a RecursiveTask-style join,
or just return without
a value if it's
a RecursiveAction-style join.
And that's basically the
collaborative Jiffy Lube model
of processing that we
have talked about earlier.
Why does the ForkJoinPool
use LIFO ordering?
It's done to improve the
locality of reference
and the performance
of the caches.
And so what it's
trying to do is it's
trying to make sure
that the freshest
work is done before work that's
further back in its deck.
And so the reason for
that is that if you
work with the freshest
work, then you're
likely to have all
of the instructions
and data for that task already
in the processor cache.
Remember, the processors have
instruction and data caches
that they use to try to
optimize performance.
And they're pretty
large nowadays.
But they'll eventually fill up.
And so you're more likely to
get something in the cache
if you get the thing that
was most recently processed
than you are if
you get something
that's been there for a while.
So that's why the
deck is accessed
by its owning thread
in LIFO order--
to try to improve locality
of reference and leverage
the caching that's being done.